---
title: "My First Lambda School Blog Post"
date: 2019-04-11
tags: [driverless trucks, automation, logistics]
---

### Driverless Trucks: Why Drivers Are Not as Replaceable as Some May Think

**Automation has reshaped life in the 21st Century.** It has transformed how we
do business, and no industry has been impacted more by automation than the
manufacturing industry. Automation has increased productivity, without
increasing labor costs. It has improved efficiency, so more product can be
produced in a shorter amount of time. And automation has improved job site
safety by taking some of the heavy lifting away from the workers.

However, these benefits have come at a price…jobs. In fact, the U.S. lost 5.6
million manufacturing jobs between 2000 and 2010, and around 85% of the jobs
lost were due to automation ([Federica Cocco, Financial
Times](https://www.ft.com/content/dec677c0-b7e6-11e6-ba85-95d1533d9a62)). And
now, automation has its sights set on the trucking industry. There is mounting
fear that driverless technology will put 3.5 million drivers out of work.
However, it’s our belief that drivers won’t be so easily replaced.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*k2NC8FHgGwxDw7pw8fR1iw.jpeg)

#### Drivers perform critical tasks that can’t be automated

* Hooking up airlines
* Hooking and unhooking trailers
* Fueling the truck
* Performing pre-trip inspections on trailers (checking for leaks, tears, holes,
and road worthiness)
* Liaison between the shipper/receiver and the trucking company

Of all the responsibilities of being a driver, the most overlooked (and
underappreciated) is that drivers interact with customers daily. They provide
shippers with order information, so the correct freight is loaded on their
trailer. They provide receivers with paperwork showing what’s on the trailer and
where the load originated. Drivers also provide dispatch with critical
information regarding delays, breakdowns, and wrong or missing load information.

#### The cost of replacing existing fleet will be high

Replacing standard trucks with driverless trucks will be very expensive in the
short-term, which may prevent smaller trucking companies from investing in a new
technology. In fact, a lot of the smaller companies have too much money tied up
in their current assets, and will not have the available capital to invest in
driverless trucks. As seen with most advancements in technology, there will be a
lag between the introduction of driverless technology and widespread
implementation.

Driverless trucks will also be a financial burden on shippers and receivers.
Often times, drivers are responsible for moving trailers on a customer’s lot,
assisting with the loading or unloading of freight, and verifying that the
paperwork matches their load information. With driverless trucks, these
responsibilities will be solely on the shippers and receivers. If the shipper
makes a mistake, no one is going to catch it till the load arrives at the
receiver, which might cost the customer thousands of dollars, not to mention
lost time without product.

#### The immediate impact of driverless trucks

Driverless technology is the future of trucking, but that future will still need
experienced drivers. In fact, most of the driverless trucks being tested now
still require a human driver to navigate non-interstate roads. Pedestrians,
cyclists, road construction, traffic lights, and stop signs all make it very
difficult for driverless trucks to navigate city roads…it will be even more
difficult to navigate rural roads.

#### The Role of Driverless Trucks

Driverless trucks should initially be used to supplement a company’s current
fleet. They can help smooth out capacity issues caused by driver turnover and
used to shuttle loads between terminal hubs, especially when the majority of the
miles are on the interstate. This will free drivers up to stay in a central
location, which will allow them to spend more time at home with their families.

#### Closing Thoughts

While change can be scary, it is inevitable. No matter how much we may want
things to stay the same, technology is constantly evolving and impacting our
lives in new and exciting ways. Driverless trucks should be embraced. They will
reduce accidents caused by driver fatigue or error, and they will help reduce
the stress related to driving long distances. But drivers should rest assured
that they play a vital roll in the trucking industry, and that is not going to
change any time soon.